KALAMKARI : BEAUTIFUL TIMELESS ART
Welcome to the era of hand-made, hand-painted, handwoven products!!

One such hand-painted textile product from South India is now in vogue and Khinkhwab is one of the staunch supporter and lover of this beautiful Kalamkari...

We are trying to unfold some facts about Kalamkari which are less known, or rarely heard and then forgotten long back!


ABOUT KALAMKARI <done>
Kalamkari is a type of hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile, produced in Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. It is more than just being a fabric used for clothing or home. It is more than textiles to an experience that culture has witnessed over centuries. This textile is supposed to be a multi-colored fabric in one of its rarest forms.

Kalamkari is known to be a healing fabric, as the colors, motifs and the narration of magical forms create an aura that heals an individual physically and spiritually. Only natural dyes are used in Kalamkari, which is an ancient style of hand painting done on cotton or silk fabric with a tamarind pen. The word Kalamkari is derived from a Persian word where ‘kalam‘ means pen and ‘Kari‘ refers to craftsmanship. While Pedana and Machilipatnam are the hubs for hand block-printed Kalamkari, Srikalahasti in Chittoor district of Andhra Pradesh is known for the pen-drawn format. Kalamkari has been around for nearly 2000 years in India.


KALAMKARI OVER THE YEARS... <done>
Kalamkari art has been practiced by many families in Andhra Pradesh, some villages in Tamil Nadu by migrants from Telugu speaking families and over the generations have constituted their livelihood.

As an art form, it found its peak in the wealthy middle Ages. The Mughals who patronized this craft in the Coromandel called the practitioners of this craft "qualamkars", from which the term "kalamkari" evolved. In this era, term refers to the making of any cotton fabric patterned through 

Vegetable dyes by free hand painting and block printing.In places where the fabric is block printed the kalam (pen) is used to draw finer details and for application of some colors.
In modern times, this has become completely digital. New types and new techniques are introduced and the digital files of kalamkari (pen work) are totally introduced widely all over the regions of India.


KALAMKARI TECHNIQUE <done>
According to sources, Hand block-printed Kalamkari is a tedious and time-consuming process involving a minimum of 10 steps.

Cotton cloth pieces are bought from mills and cut into pieces. These pieces are soaked in water mixed with cow-dung. Once soaked well, the water is loosely squeezed out and the cloth is laid on the floor overnight.

The next morning, these pieces are washed on a stone in a pond and spread on grass and water till evening. This process is repeated the next day and then all the cloth pieces are washed and dried.

The next step involves treating the cloth with Myrobalan seeds and buffalo milk to prevent smudging of dyes when painted. After this process, the cloth is printed using natural colors as per the required design and then washed in flowing, fresh water.


MOTIFS AND DESIGN: BEAUTY IN VARIETY <done>
The art of Kalamkari has existed for centuries as noted and often the designs were customised for the country that they were being exported to. The textile in figure 8 is that of an intricately designed hanging made for the Siamese royal court. The design is customised to the Thai taste and is in lattice patterns. Figures of the Hindu deity Lord Brahma are seen in the pattern of nymphs and rosettes. The textile design depicted in The quilt depicted in Figure 9 is lined with Chinese silk and in done using vibrant colours like red, yellow, pink and blue. This is inspired by early 18th century European design.

The designs and patterns made for home use had Indian traditional motifs which continue to this day and find expression in the overall design, generated for the end product which could be a panel, bag, apparel or item of upholstery. As already mentioned, Nelly H. Sethna revitalised the designs in th 1970s. Though the motifs and designs can be broadly classified into figurative, floral, animal and geometric they have evolved with time and creativity of the artisans. The preferences of the clientele have influenced the designs. Today the work is customised and cater more to contemporary taste, yet retaining the classic signature of Kalamkari. The use of Kalamkari in the 21st century can be understood by reflecting on the use of the art in contemporary fashion. The most commonly used motifs are the paisley, floral, Buddha-face, creepers, peacock among others. The theme of Radha-Krishna is well used in figurative Kalamkari for panels and on sarees too. The recent trends show use of embellishments with gold ‘booti’ on the sarees as well.

COLOURS
Kalamkari art primarily use earthy colours like indigo, mustard, rust, black and green. Natural dyes used to paint colours in Kalamkari art is extracted for natural sources with no use of chemicals and artificial matter.
For instance, craftsmen extract black color by blending jaggery, water and iron fillings which they essentially use for outlining the sketches. While mustard or yellow is derived by boiling pomegranate peels, red hues are created from bark of madder or algirin. Likewise, blue is obtained from indigo and green is derived by mixing yellow and blue together.

TYPES <done>
There are two identifiable styles of Kalamkari art in India – Srikalahasti style and Machilipatnam style.
In the Machilipatnam style of Kalamkari, motifs are essentially printed with hand-carved traditional blocks with intricate detailing painted by hands. On the other hand, Srikalahasti style of painting draws inspiration from the Hindu mythology describing scenes from the epics and folklore. This style holds a strong religious connect because of its origin in the temples.


The traders and merchants across the world used Kalamkari paintings as currency in the spice trade. There was a very high demand of spices like nutmeg, clove, and pepper as well as aromatic woods and oils, which were available almost exclusively in parts of Southeast Asia and Indonesia. The Southeast Asian and Indonesian traders demanded Indian textile in form of Kalamkari Paintings for ritual and ceremonial use.

KALAMKARI FABRICS <done>
Kalamkari is one of the traditional art for of India noted for its extraordinary beautiful hand paintings on fabrics. This is very popularly used as handspring in fabrics for dress material, sarees and ready-made salwar kameez, kurtas, etc. The most common theme followed is exhibiting magnificent paintings of sun chariots, famous deities, and scenes from the epics Mahabharata and Ramayana.

Kalamkari sarees showcase the fine craftsmanship of Indian artists. It is a perfect blend of elegance and heritage followed by the latest trends. The wide range of Kalamkari sarees is available with different styles and fabric. They don’t get faded away with the wash, since natural dyes and colors are used. 

Kalamkari sarees are perfect for ladies who are looking for class and elegance. As the Kalamkari prints come in cotton and silk sarees, it gives a unique style. Kalamkari silk sarees with block prints are easy to wear and provides comfy to the user. As normal hand washing can shrink the fabric, make sure to dry wash or petrol wash to get better results.

The designs done using Kalamkari bring out the best in you. Even though they are traditional sarees, even today, these sarees have not lost their worth in the modern fashion industry. The mix and match of Kalamkari's works give the fabric a rich look.

Kalamkari printed sarees are widely used  come in Cotton, Crepe, Designer wear, Printed sarees, Silk Sarees, Georgette, Chiffon, Patch work, Chanderi, Kerala Kasavu sarees.